---
layout: default
title:  "IPC Diffs"
date:   2019-03-17 22:46:25
comments: true
categories: os
---

#### description:  
There are so many Interprocess Communication methods (IPC) in operating systems:  

#### Questions:  
1> Why do we need IPC ?  

#### File  
A record stored on disk, or a record synthesized on demand by a file server, which can be accessed by multiple processes.  

#### Signal  
A system message sent from on process to another, not usually used to transfer data but instead used to remotely command the partnered process.  

#### Socket  
Data sent over a network interface, either to a different process on the same computer or to another computer on the network. Stream-oriented(TCP) or more rarely message-oriented(UDP, SCTP).  

#### Unix domain socket  
Similar to an internet socket but all communication occurs within the kernel. Domain sockets use the file system as their address space. Processed reference a domain socket as an inode, and multiple processes can communicate with one socket.  

#### Message queue  
A data stream similar to socket, but which usually preserves message boundaries. Typically implemented by the operating system, they allow multiple processes read and write to the message queue without being directly connected to each other.  

#### Pipe  
A unidirectional data channel. Data written to the write end of the pipe is buffered by the operating system until it is read from the end of the pipe. Two-way data streams between processes can be achieved by creating two pipes utilizing standard input and output.  

#### Named pipe  
A pipe implemented through a file on the file system insteaded of stardard input and output. Multiple processes can read and write to the file as a buffer for IPC data.  

#### Shared memory 
Multiple processes are given access to the same block of memory which creates a shared buffer for the processes to communicate with each other.  

#### Semaphore  
synchronization.  




### Diffs:  
Which aspects should we concern when we compare these IPC methods ?  
| Methods | Supporting OS | Security | Latency | Complexity | Efficiency | Usability |  
| ----| ----| ----| ----| ----| ----| ----|  
| File | Most OS | NOT | NOT | NOT | NOT | NOT | 
